MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stae603

Advance Access publication 2024 February 27

Iron depletion in mineral dust grains from Saturn’s main rings
Simon Linti ,1 ‹ Frank Postberg,1 ‹ Hsiang-Wen Hsu,2 Jon K. Hillier,1 Christian Fischer,3
Mario Trieloff,3 Jürgen Schmidt,1 Sascha Kempf2,4 and Ralf Srama 5
1 Institut für Geologische Wissenschaften, Freie Universität Berlin, D-12249 Berlin, Germany
2 Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80303, USA
3 Institut für Geowissenschaften, Universität Heidelberg, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
5 Institut für Raumfahrtsysteme, Universität Stuttgart, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany

Accepted 2024 February 26. Received 2024 February 26; in original form 2023 November 14

ABSTRACT

During the Grand Finale orbits, Cassini’s Cosmic Dust Analyzer (CDA) recorded in situ mass spectra of ice and mineral nanodust
grains ejected from Saturn’s main rings falling into the planet’s atmosphere. We present a compositional analysis of the mineral
dust fraction employing a spectral deconvolution method to determine the elemental composition of these grains. The results
indicate a relatively homogenous composition of exclusively Mg-rich silicates, with Mg, Si, and Ca close to CI chondritic
abundances but a significant depletion in Fe and only traces of organic material at best. The Fe depletion becomes even more
pronounced when compared to Fe-rich interplanetary dust particles encountered by CDA in the Saturnian system, which are
assumed to contaminate and darken the main rings over time. We discuss potential explanations for the depletion, from which
we favour compositional alteration of the infalling dust grains by impact-triggered chemistry in combination with dynamical
selection effects and instrumental bias as the most plausible ones. This might cause an accumulation of Fe in the main rings over
time, most likely in the form of oxides.
Key words: methods: data analysis – planets and satellites: individual: Saturn – planets and satellites: rings.

1 I N T RO D U C T I O N
The investigation of Saturn’s rings has fascinated scientists since their
discovery. Observations with various techniques over the last decades
revealed structural details and the composition of the rings (Pollack
1975; de Pater & Dickel 1991; Spilker et al. 2003; Dougherty,
Esposito & Krimigis 2009). The best insight into the ring dynamics
and composition was delivered by the Cassini-Huygens mission,
which explored Saturn’s ring system over 13 yr. Most compositional
analyses were made with remote sensing techniques, showing that
Saturn’s main rings consist mostly of water ice, with the non-icy
components, making up only a few per cent of the rings’ mass, in
agreement with silicates (Morris et al. 1985; Cruikshank, Imanaka &
Dalle Ore 2005; Clark et al. 2008), but also organic compounds
(e.g. Cuzzi & Estrada 1998; Nicholson et al. 2008; Bradley et al. in
review), as well as amorphous carbon (Cuzzi & Estrada 1998; Cuzzi
et al. 2018) and maybe fine-grained iron and/or hematite (Clark et
al. 2012). Regarding silicates, the most recent remote sensing results
infer volume silicate fractions varying between 0.1 and 0.5 per cent
for the A and B rings (Zhang et al. 2017a), whereas the C ring was
found to contain the highest silicate abundance – 1–2 per cent in
most areas and a maximum of 6–11 per cent in the centre of the ring

 E-mail: s.linti@fu-berlin.de (SL); frank.postberg@fu-berlin.de (FP)

(Zhang et al. 2017b). Regarding the non-icy ring material, Cuzzi et
al. (2018) consider these values as upper limits for silicates.
In this study, we focus on the ring particles detected during the
Cassini Grand Finale orbits from 2017 April to September. During
this period, the Cassini spacecraft traversed 22 times through the
gap between the inner edge of the D ring and Saturn’s cloud tops,
providing unprecedented opportunities to study Saturn’s main rings
with in situ instruments. The measurements were carried out by the
Cosmic Dust Analyzer (CDA), an impact ionization time-of-flight
mass spectrometer capable of providing elemental compositional
information of individual grains impacting the instrument target
at speeds of at least several kilometres per second (Srama et al.
2004). CDA observations during the Grand Finale mission were
motivated by an earlier study showing that charged dust particles
could be dynamically unstable and propagate along magnetic field
lines connecting Saturn and its rings (Northrop & Hill 1982). Because
of the northward offset of Saturn’s dipolar magnetic field, charged
dust particles with sizes of 10 s of nm are expected to fall preferably
into Saturn’s Southern hemisphere (Northrop & Hill 1982; Ip 1983;
Connerney 1986). Initial results published by Hsu et al. (2018) show
that (i) nanodust 10 s of nm in size forms the dominant population
in between Saturn and its rings, while grains larger than ∼0.1 μm
have a spatial density orders of magnitude lower; (ii) the measured
particle flux exhibits a significant north–south asymmetry, consistent
with the pre-Cassini dynamical analysis, suggesting the detected
particles, likely released as impact ejecta, indeed originated from the

© 2024 The Author(s).
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Royal Astronomical Society. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly cited.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

4 Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA

1208

S. Linti et al.

main rings; and (iii) water ice and silicate grains are identified as
the main compositional classes of the detected nanodust particles,
with silicates accounting for about 30 per cent of those spectra to
which a composition type could be assigned. The only other nonwater constituents detected are small amounts of unspecified organic
material in a few ice grains.
Fig. 1 shows the dynamical model established using CDA measurements (Hsu et al. 2018), indicating most grains detected by CDA
originated from the B and C rings. This suggests that silicate particles
detected by CDA should be highly representative of the non-icy
constituent in Saturn’s main rings.
The work presented here represents a detailed investigation of this
ring debris, focusing on the silicate fraction. The main ring particles
are all high-speed detections, with an average impact speed of around
30 km s–1 . This high impact speed produces mass spectral features
almost exclusively from elemental cations (see Section 2). The high
impact speed on to the instrument target allowed the detection of
particles only 10 s of nm in size.

2 M AT E R I A L S A N D M E T H O D S
2.1 The data set
For the analysis, data of 13 Grand Finale orbits were used (Table 1).
Although the pointing was not optimized for CDA during each of
the 13 ring plane crossings (RPXs), the largest number of spectra
were recorded within ±20 min from the RPXs, which represents the
time frame where modelling predicts that most particles stem from
the main rings (Fig. 1; Hsu et al. 2018). The data set was restricted to
those spectra recorded by CDA with signals strong enough to attempt
spectral classification. From a total of 1353 spectra, 362 spectra
of possible silicate particles were identified (∼27 per cent, Table
S1), divided into four qualitative groups (Table 2). The remaining
MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

Table 1. List of the Grand Finale orbits used for the analysis. Given are the
UTC of the respective ring plane crossings (RPX), the number of identified
silicate particles, and the articulation of CDA during the respective RPX.

Rev

UTC of RPX

Number of silicate
spectra

CDA articulation (◦ )

273
275
278
279
280
281
283
284
287
288
290
291
292

2017–129T06:13:21
2017–142T03:11:05
2017–161T12:41:20
2017–167T23:52:04
2017–174T10:53:45
2017–180T22:10:33
2017–193T20:43:37
2017–200T07:50:09
2017–219T17:18:35
2017–226T04:18:28
2017–239T02:15:21
2017–245T13:12:00
2017–252T00:10:04

13
33
9
39
13
31
35
9
52
18
14
34
21

105
74
47
96
45
155
127
270
123
105
115
125
106

fraction is dominated by water ice spectra (∼57 per cent) and
currently unclassified spectra (∼16 per cent) with ambiguous spectral
signatures. The 41 spectra of the lowest confidence level (‘silicate
uncertain’) were not used for the compositional analysis in this
work.
The silicate spectra were first calibrated onto a mass scale, using
the CDA data analysing software. If present, the mass lines of Fe+
(main isotope 56 u) and Rh+ (103 u) were used to calibrate the
spectrum. For spectra without a significant Fe+ mass line, Mg+
(main isotope 24 u) could be used instead, although with a higher
uncertainty. This is because Na+ (23 u) is often not resolved from
the neighbouring Mg+ peak and thus might also contribute to the
peak maximum. Spectral calibration
from a time to a mass domain
√
follows the relation t = a m + b, for ions of mass m arriving at

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

Figure 1. Nanodust flux profile registered by the Chemical Analyzer Target (CAT) of Cassini’s CDA during orbit 275. The upper panel shows the measured
and modelled flux profiles as the spacecraft moved southwards crossing the ring plane. In the model, the grain radius is set to be 20 nm and the bulk density is
1 g cm–3 . Material-specific densities, i.e. for non-icy particles, were not considered here (dynamical models assuming densities of 3 g cm–3 for mineral grain
are presented in Section 3). The lower panel shows the modelled source region distribution for particles detected at locations with respect to the ring plane. The
results suggest most originated from the B and C rings (adapted from Hsu et al. 2018).

Mineral dust from Saturn’s main rings

1209

Table 2. Spectral criteria of the four identified silicate groups. The percentages reflect the fractions of the full data set. σ is the
standard deviation of the local spectrum noise.
Spectral type
Silicate surea
(117 spectra, 8.6 per cent)

Spectral criteria
 High S/N
 Merged Na+ and Mg+ lines ≥ 4 σ
 Merged Al+ and Si+ lines ≥ 2σ

Silicate likelyb
(33 spectra, 2.4 per cent)

 Generally high S/N
 Merged Na+ and Mg+ lines mostly ≥ 4σ
 Merged Al+ and Si+ lines mostly ≥ 2σ
 Slightly ambiguous due to absence of some mineral-forming ions, mostly Ca+ or Fe+

Silicate weakc
(171 spectra, 12.6 per cent)

 Slightly ambiguous due to low S/N
 Merged Na+ and Mg+ lines < 4σ
 Merged Al+ and Si+ lines < 2σ

Silicate uncertain
(41 spectra, 3.0 per cent)

 Highly ambiguous due to low S/N
 Absence of important mineral-forming ions, such as Si+ and Fe+
 Overall spectral shape still agrees better with silicates than ice

a Used for individual compositional analysis in Figs 4–7.
b,c Used for statistical purposes only in Figs 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8.

time t. Here, the stretch parameter a is related to the geometry of
CDA and the applied field strengths (e.g. Hillier et al. 2006), and
the shift parameter b is related to instrument triggering. During the
last two Grand Finale orbits, the potential at the instrument target
was increased from about 1000 to 1400 V, shortening the TOF of the
ions, resulting in smaller values of a and more compressed spectra
with slightly decreased mass resolution. These spectra are excluded
from the co-added spectra (see below).
Table 2 also summarizes the spectral features used as criteria to
classify the four silicate groups. The qualitative criteria of ‘silicate
sure’ spectra were considered as sufficient for quantitative analysis
and their compositions are analysed individually. Assignment as
silicates for the spectra of the second and third group (‘likely’ and
‘weak’) is slightly ambiguous, and therefore they are not used for
individual compositional analysis. Since the ‘weak’ spectra, however,
account for more than 50 per cent of the silicate data set, they are
investigated co-added in a single sum spectrum that provides sufficient signal-to-noise ratios (S/Ns) for quantitative analysis. In later
discussion, they are referred to as ‘weak signal’. The fourth group
(‘silicate uncertain’) comprises highly ambiguous spectra; however,
their spectral appearance might still agree best with silicates. They
are not considered in the compositional analysis.
2.2 Spectral classification
The spectra identified as silicate show mass lines of Si+ and other
mineral-forming ions, such as Mg+ , Ca+ , and Fe+ (Fig. 2a), although,
except for Si+ , not necessarily all of them are identifiable in any
single spectrum. In most cases, together with Si+ , the lines of Mg+ ,

Fe+ , and Al+ were sufficient to determine the siliceous nature of the
grain. Three silicate spectra show an additional peak attributed to
S+ (Fig. 2b), which points at an additional sulphur-bearing phase in
these grains that could possibly be entrained into these particles by
a secondary effect (see Section 4, Scenario 3b).
In addition to the particle ions, potential contaminants such as ions
of Na+ , K+ , and C+ are observable in the spectra. Rh+ is the target
material, which is excavated and ionized by particles impacting at
speeds higher than approximately 8 km s–1 (Postberg et al. 2009a),
and therefore is frequently seen in the analysed spectra. The mass
lines of Na+ and K+ are, at least to a greater part, related to an
instrument target contamination, although they could theoretically
be particle constituents. After multiple plume encounters during
the close Enceladus flybys between 2008 and 2015, the CDA
Chemical Analyzer Target (CAT) was increasingly contaminated
with residues deposited, or recondensing, on to the target from saltrich ice grains (Postberg et al. 2009b, 2011). Varying amounts of the
contamination layer were ionized by every impacting particle studied
in this work, leading to potentially significant contamination peaks,
predominantly Na+ , with varying amplitudes in CDA’s cation mass
spectra.
Oxygen is visible in most of the spectra in the data set (Table 2). It
generally appears in spectra recorded from grains impacting at about
20 km s–1 or more and can be used as a speed indicator (Postberg
et al. 2009a; Fiege et al. 2014). Oxygen cannot be ruled out as a
potential minor contaminant, stemming from the instrument target
(Postberg et al. 2009a), but to a greater part is likely to stem from
the silicate particles (Hillier et al. 2012; Fiege et al. 2014; Hsu et al.
2018).
MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

 C+ line ≥ 3σ

1210

S. Linti et al.

(a)

Figure 2. (a) An example of a typical high S/N silicate spectrum detected during the Grand Finale orbits. Particle constituents are highlighted in yellow,
contaminants and target material are highlighted in grey. The O+ mass line is most likely to be from a particle constituent, but contributions from target
contamination cannot be ruled out. (b) Silicate spectrum with a rare but significant sulphur peak, highlighted in green. The upper dashed line represents the
significance level (3σ ) above the average spectrum noise (lower dashed line).

2.3 Particle size calculation
The radii of the silicate particles are estimated to range from about
20 to 100 nm, with 81 per cent being between 20 and 40 nm and
19 per cent being larger (Fig. 3). The particle radii are determined
from the calculated masses, assuming a spherical particle shape
and an average density of 3 g cm–3 . The formula that was used
to calculate the particle masses was constructed empirically from
CDA dust accelerator experiments with iron particles (Srama et al.
MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

2004) and is

m = 48.2 ×

QI
v5

0.91
(1)

with the impact speed v in km s–1 , assumed to be similar to the
spacecraft speed during the ring plane crossings, typically around
30 km s–1 ; ion yield QI in C; and mass m in kg.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

(b)

Mineral dust from Saturn’s main rings

1211

The mass and size estimates, based on the QI signal, are affected by
significant uncertainties for individual grains. This is mostly caused
by the remaining uncertainty of the exact impact speed and the fact
that the calibration of CDA used iron dust particles and the ion yield
of the silicates investigated here might be different. This amounts to
an uncertainty of a factor of 2 for the absolute sizes given here (Hsu
et al. 2018). However, the given sizes are more reliable for a larger
ensemble, specifically when only relative sizes are considered (i.e.
particles in bin A are twice as large as in bin B).
2.4 Deconvolution
The resolving power of CDA, from its mass resolution of
m/m = 20–50 (Srama et al. 2004), is too low to resolve some
neighbouring mass peaks. This results in spectra containing broad,
joined features comprising peaks from ions with similar masses, such
as Na+ , Mg+ , Al+ and Si+ or K+ and Ca+ . To interpret such spectra
a manual deconvolution method was applied, similar to the technique
that was used to infer compositional information about interstellar
dust (ISD) particles (Altobelli et al. 2016). The ISD particles were
detected with the same instrument and at similar speeds, affirming
the validity of the technique, which was developed further for this
study. This method enables spectral ion abundances to be obtained
from individual grains by disentangling the neighbouring mass lines.
As a first step, a reference peak was selected, which represents
the flight time distribution of a single ion species arriving at the
instrument detector. The carbon peak was found to be a suitable
candidate, as it is definitely present as a contaminant with an
unquantifiable potential contribution from the dust particle in all
spectra. For the mass range considered in this work, a Gaussian
function was found to be the best approximation to the peak shape.
The Gaussian profile was solely fitted using the left (low-mass)
flank of the peak, up to the maximum, to avoid the influence of

CH+ ions, which might be present in the right flank and artificially
broaden the reference peak. The Gaussian function/reference peak
is characterized by three parameters: amplitude, centre (position on
the x-axis) and σ  (= FWHM/2.355, where FWHM is the full width
at half-maximum of the peak).
The amplitude and position are adjusted individually in each
spectrum, to fit the respective ion species into the peak clusters.
As higher mass peaks from Na+ until Ca+ are slightly broader than
the reference C+ peak in the mass spectra, on average by a factor of
1.1 on the time-of-flight axis, σ  was corrected by a factor of 1.1.
In the Na+ –Si+ unresolved feature, species’ Gaussian shaped
peaks were fitted in order of decreasing mass (Fig. S1). Isotopes,
such as from Mg, were fitted as individual peaks. First, the reference
peak was adjusted in amplitude and position until it matched the right
flank of the feature (= Si+ ). After a successful fit, this Si+ fraction
was subtracted from the spectrum, leaving a feature with Na+ , Mg+
and Al+ ions. Al+ was skipped, due to the uncertain position between
Mg+ and Si+ . Continuing to move to lower masses, the isotopes of
Mg+ , with abundances of about 13 per cent (25 Mg) and 14 per cent
(26 Mg) of the main 24 Mg isotope, were fitted next. After all Mg
isotopes were subtracted from the spectrum, Na+ was then fitted on
the left flank of the feature. Any residuals between Mg+ and Si+ were
considered to be Al+ ions at 27 u. The uncertainty of the 27 u mass
line is addressed in Section 3.1. The K+ –Ca+ feature was treated in
the same way as described above, starting with Ca+ .
After all elements were fitted, their spectral abundances could
be initially estimated from the Gaussian peak amplitudes. However,
iron cation peaks, especially in spectra with high ion yields due to
high impact velocity, are often asymmetric and are characterized
by an extended left flank. The same effect is visible for the Rh+
mass lines (Hillier et al. 2006), with left flank shapes dictated by ion
energetics and the instrument field geometry. As the left flank of the
Fe+ peak has no signs of obvious contributions from other cations, no

MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

Figure 3. Size distribution of silicate particles, showing a maximum of 48 per cent between 30 and 40 nm. The decrease below 30 nm does not reflect the
actual abundances, but CDA’s detection limit, below which we do not receive reliable spectral signals of all particles of this size. Note, that there are no silicate
particles with calculated equivalent radii above 120 nm detected in any of Cassini’s ring plane crossings in the Grand Finale orbits, although the detector was
sensitive to maximum radii of about 350 nm. Please note that the absolute size determination using the CDA’s QI signal is affected by significant uncertainties
(see the main text).

1212

S. Linti et al.

Table 3. List of RSFs (Fiege et al. 2014) used to determine elemental
abundances in the silicate particles. Note that the errors are valid for the
determination of absolute element abundances in mineral grains but can be
neglected if element abundances of two CDA data sets are compared, which
is done to compare Fe concentrations in the main text (e.g. Fig. 5). The error
of Si is included in the error of the other elements.

Table 4. Mean relative differences of the determined ion abundances inferred
with the two deconvolution methods and their standard deviations. Although
the mean values of Fe agree very well, the standard deviation is fairly large
because of relatively strong scattering of the individual values.
Ion species

Mg

27 u (Al)

Si

Ca

Fe

Element

Mean relative
difference
Standard
deviation

0.08

0.10

0.16

0.25

–0.01

0.23

0.22

0.30

0.31

0.38

RSF
(LAMA)

Mg

Al

Si

Ca

Fe

4
5.5 +
−2

3
3.99 +
−2

1

11
14.12 +
−6

1
1.32 +
−0.5

where a = peak amplitude and erf √32 = 0.9973.
Na+ and K+ abundances are determined in the spectra, but as
described above, most likely include or are contamination sources
and thus will not be quantified as actual constituents of the particles.

To assess any associated uncertainties with the applied deconvolution technique, the determined ion abundances are compared with
the results of an independently developed automated deconvolution
algorithm, applied to the same silicate data set, also using the factor
of 1.1 to account for changes in peak width with mass. From the peak
integrals of the respective ions inferred from individual spectra with
the two methods, the relative differences were calculated using
Relative difference =

Intmanual − Intalgorithm
,
Intmanual

(3)

where Intmanual is the peak integral inferred with the deconvolution
technique described in Section 2.4 (equation 2) and Intalgorithm
represents the result of the automated algorithm.
The values of the mean relative differences are given in Table 4.
We find that the determined values seem to be element-specific,
implying systematic differences in the peak fitting process. The
mean relative differences are minor to moderate, with Ca the least
in agreement between the two techniques. The manual method
delivers, on average, slightly higher abundances for all quantifiable
ion species, except for Fe. The standard deviation of the relative
differences, however, shows that this trend is likely to not be
significant.
3 R E S U LT S
3.1 Composition

2.5 Relative sensitivity factors
Ionization efficiencies are element-specific, so after extracting the
spectral cation abundances, these values were converted to elemental
abundances in the particles. This was achieved by applying relative
sensitivity factors (RSFs; Table 3, Fiege et al. 2014). These RSFs
were determined for orthopyroxene dust grains impacting at velocities between 19 and 25 km s–1 , using an electrostatic dust accelerator
(Mocker et al. 2011) and an impact ionization mass spectrometer
LAMA (Large Area Mass Analyzer; Fiege et al. 2014). They are
valid for particle impact speeds from 19 until at least 38 km s–1
(Fiege et al. 2014), which covers the range of impact speeds during
the Grand Finale orbits. The same RSFs were used in Altobelli et al.
(2016) to determine the elemental abundances in ISD particles and,
despite the large errors, plausible results were achieved. Hillier et
al. (2018) determined RSFs for olivine and although the errors are
also large, the derived values lie within the error bars of Fiege et al.
(2014).

2.6 Statistical analysis
All details of the statistical evaluation of the data presented in the
following Results section are provided in the legends of the respective
figures.
MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

Here, we present the compositional evaluation of the main ring
mineral dust particles as seen by Cassini’s CDA during the Grand
Finale orbits. We find that all spectra with S/Ns sufficient for an
individual compositional analysis are dominated by Mg+ ions, with
a smaller Si+ feature, revealing their siliceous nature. We do not find
any spectra indicative of other mineral types like oxides or sulfides
in the data set. In general, no Fe-dominated spectra were identified,
which are known from CDA analyses elsewhere in the Saturnian
system (Fischer et al. 2018; Trieloff et al. 2023).
The elemental ratios of individually analysed silicate spectra
(‘silicate sure’) inferred using a deconvolution technique (see Section
2.4) are shown in Fig. 4. Ion ratios as determined in the spectra before
application of relative sensitivity factors (RSFs; Table 3, Fiege et al.
2014) can be found in Fig. 5. The weaker spectra (‘silicate weak’) of
the data set were investigated as one combined co-added spectrum,
which increased the S/N to a sufficient level and allowed the average
composition of this spectrum class to be quantified.
In addition to the derived silicate particle values, Fig. 4 also shows
the expected ratios for CDA ISD particles (Altobelli et al. 2016)
and CDA interplanetary dust particles (IDPs; Fischer et al. 2018),
both detected by CDA in the Saturnian system with comparable
impact speeds on to the instrument. Additionally, the figure shows
as reference material bulk values of CI, CH, and LL chondritic
material (Lodders & Fegley 1998) and selected cosmochemically

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

deconvolution was performed, and directly measured peak integrals
were used. For the few silicate spectra without an Fe+ peak, an upper
limit for the Fe content was estimated from background level and
spectral noise in the typical range of the Fe+ mass line between 53 and
59 u. The integrals of strongly asymmetric Fe+ peaks were corrected
by a factor of 0.9 to accommodate the influence of elements such as
Cr, Mn, and Ni in the covered mass range, assuming CI chondritic
abundances of these elements relative to Fe.
By applying the deconvolution technique to the data set, the
elemental composition of 85 per cent of the individually investigated
silicate spectra (‘silicate sure’, Table 2) could be determined. The
remaining 15 per cent either had excessive residuals and/or proved
impossible to obtain a suitable reference peak fit.
To compare the peak amplitudes inferred from the fit/manual
deconvolution procedure of the Na+ –Si+ and K+ –Ca+ features with
the integrated Fe+ abundances, the Gaussian peak amplitudes were
converted into peak integrals:
 +3σ
√
3
f (x ) dx = 2π × a × σ ♦ × 1.1 × erf √ ,
(2)
2
−3σ

Mineral dust from Saturn’s main rings
(a)

1213

(b)

relevant minerals olivine, enstatite and saponite. Note that at the
analysed particle sizes, grain compositions are expected to tend to
monomineralicity, and not bulk chondritic compositions.
The majority of the individual data points in Fig. 4 scatter over
one order of magnitude, but considering the error bars of the mean
ring silicate values (red circles), which represent the standard error
of the mean (SEM) combined with the errors of the RSFs (see
Table 3), the similarity of Mg/Si and Ca/Si to cosmic (CI chondritic)
abundances is significant. The error bars were determined with an
error propagation, using the doubled standard error of the mean
(2σ significance) of the derived ion ratios and the errors of the RSFs
(Table 3). Note that the errors of the RSFs are irrelevant, when directly
comparing ion abundances of different spectra, especially when they
were recorded with almost identical impact velocities (see Figs 5
and 6).
The main finding is that Fe is significantly depleted with respect to
all other references, only LL chondrites still lie within the error bars
(Fig. 4a). The Fe/Si ratios of nearly all individual silicate particles
are below cosmic (CI chondritic) abundances, on average by a factor
of 2.1. Compared with the total averaged IDP population observed in
the Saturnian system by CDA, the Fe depletions in the ring silicates
are larger, here by a factor of 5. Even the Fe-poor IDP subtype seen by
CDA is still less depleted in Fe than the most Fe-rich main ring dust
grain of this study. The ‘weak signal’ spectra show an even smaller
Fe/Si ratio compared to ‘Mean Rings’, indicating a systematic Fe
depletion in smaller particles. These observations raise questions
related to the mineralogy or potential alteration of the particles, and
the subsequent consequences for the pollution of the main rings with
interplanetary material (see Section 4).
Another striking observation is that, compared to cosmic abundances, 27 u in the data set is strongly enriched if assumed to be
entirely due to Al+ (Fig. 4b), on average by more than a factor
of 3, which could argue for the presence of Al-bearing minerals
such as feldspar in the grains. However, we consider the values
presented in the figure as an upper limit for Al+ , as a contribution
by hydrocarbons seems likely. At these high impact speeds, single

C-species are the expected main organic fragments from any kind
of hydrocarbon-rich material, including complex compounds, that
show up in spectra, followed by C2 species in proportional amounts
(e.g. Hillier et al. 2014). The higher the impact speed or energy
density, the stronger the degree of dehydrogenation (Srama 2009;
Sephton, Waite & Brockwell 2018). Therefore, C2 H3 + is expected
to be the most abundant C2 cation and interferes with Al+ at 27 u
making it impossible to distinguish these two ion species. Because of
this uncertainty, the peak is called ‘27 u’. The increased abundance
of 27 u implies either a small organic fraction within the particles
or a contamination of the CDA CAT, exactly which is yet to be
determined. Other species such as C2 H4 + and C2 H5 + interfering
with Si+ may be expected as well, though in smaller amounts.
Since the determined Si abundances, however, agree roughly with
cosmic abundances (Lodders & Fegley 1998), a significant organic
interference with Si is considered unlikely. Additionally, we do not
identify any spectra with mass lines of N+ , which argues against the
presence of HCN+ ions at 27 u.
Assuming that the ring silicates originate from interplanetary
space, they should have compositions similar to those of exogenous
particles, if no compositional differentiation or alteration processes
are at work. During Cassini’s 13 yr in the Saturnian system, CDA
produced a comprehensive data set of mineral dust, both in Saturnbound orbits and of exogenous material. The co-added spectra of
the non-icy main ring debris, compared with the exogenous events
(Fe-rich and Fe-poor) detected by CDA at similar impact speeds to
the sample of this study, excluding the ISD particles identified by
Altobelli et al. (2016), are shown in Fig. 5.
3.2 Variation in data
The individual data points (Fig. 4) show a scatter, which reflects the
true compositional variations among the particles plus a potential
stochastic variation introduced by the impact ionization process. To
set the magnitude of the scatter into context, it is compared with the
compositional variation of 36 ISD particles detected by CDA in the

MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

Figure 4. (a,b) Elemental ratios (weight per cent) inferred from spectra of the main ring silicate particles detected during Cassini’s Grand Finale orbits. ‘Rings’
indicates the ratios for individual main ring silicate particles after deconvolution and RSF correction (see Sections 2.4 and 2.5). ‘Fe upp. lim.’ points represent
spectra which do not show a significant Fe+ mass line, and for which an upper limit was estimated (see Section 2.4). Spectra with S/Ns too low for individual
analysis were evaluated combined in a co-added spectrum and the average is displayed as a single data point (‘Weak signal’). In addition to IDP and ISD values,
where RSFs have also been applied, the element ratios of different chondrites (CI, CH, and LL) are shown. (A) also displays the expected element ratios for
Fe-rich (‘Fo30’) and Fe-poor (‘Fo90’) olivine, covering significant variation in Mg/Si and Fe/Si, enstatite (‘En75’) and saponite (‘Sap’). The error bars on the
mean values are a combination of the doubled standard error of the mean (SEM) and the errors of the RSFs (see Section 2.5).

1214

S. Linti et al.
(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 5. (a–d) Co-added spectra of main ring silicates and the non-icy exogenous IDP populations for comparison. (a) Silicate spectra of the main ring debris
with high S/N, (b) ‘Weak signal’ subset of the main ring silicates, (c) Fe-rich (mostly Fe-sulfides) subset of the exogenous non-icy population recorded in the
Saturnian system with similar impact speeds as the main ring debris, and (d) Fe-poor silicate subset of the exogenous population. Note that the y-axes in panel
(b) covers only three orders of magnitude, while those of the other panels cover four. (e–f) Ion abundance ratios inferred from the spectra of the main ring silicate
particles. ‘Rings’ indicates the ratios for individual particles after deconvolution. We compare these with ion abundances of other compositional families of
mineral grains detected by CDA at similar impact velocities. Therefore, the large error introduced by the RSFs (Table 3) – needed to convert ion abundances to
element abundances – does not apply here. The error of the depicted mean values is in the order of the symbol sizes. We do not show the error bars for individual
detections (Table 4) to avoid an overcrowded plot.

Saturnian system (Altobelli et al. 2016). The result is shown in Fig. 6.
Except for a small fraction of the main ring silicates, the degree of
compositional variation within each group is similar, and therefore
the main ring silicates are considered to be nearly as homogenous as
the ISD grains. The Mg/Si ratios are comparable in both data sets.
However, the range of variation in the Fe/Ca ratio for the ISD particles
is lower, implying that the main ring silicates are less homogeneous
in their Fe and/or Ca content. The mean Fe/Ca ratio for the main
MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

ring silicates is shifted lower by a factor of 2.2 on average due to the
previously mentioned Fe depletion.

3.3 Compositional variation depending on particle size
Figs 4 and 5 indicate a systematic depletion in Fe in the smallest
particles (‘Weak signal’) compared to the average of the remaining

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

(a)

Mineral dust from Saturn’s main rings

1215

(b)

(a)

Figure 7. Variation in relative Fe abundances, depending on ion yield QI. For the given similar impact speeds, the QI signals (in fC) are a reasonable
approximation for size albeit with large uncertainties (uncertainty of the absolute value is a factor of 2, see Section 2.3). Three size regimes are averaged (2–9
fC, >9 fC and the weak silicate signals with an average value of 2.3 fC) and the values inferred from the respective individual spectra are displayed as blue and
green dots. The error bars of the mean values represent the doubled SEM, ±0.05 and ± 0.09, respectively. The weak signal data point does not show an error
since the value was inferred from a single co-added spectrum. Additionally, the approximate equivalent particle radii for the different size regimes are given,
calculated from the average QI values and assuming a density of 3 g cm–3 (see Section 2.3).

data set (‘Mean Rings’). In the following, we investigate this case in
more detail.
For any given speed, the ion yield (inferred from the QI signal,
which represents the charge arriving at the central ion grid of the
CDA) is proportional to the particle mass and depends on the grain
composition (see Section 2.3). In Fig. 7, the normalized iron contents
of three size regimes are considered to show that the compositional
variation depends on particle size. The bigger particles (QI > 9 fC)
seem to contain slightly more iron than smaller ones on average.
The relatively iron-poor population found in the smaller grains (2–9
fC) with Fe/(Mg + 27u + Si) < 0.3 is absent in the bigger size
regime. The Fe abundances of the ‘weak signals’, representing the
smallest observed size regime in this scenario with 2.3 fC on average,
are below the other mean values and therefore support this finding.
The scatter of data points between 2 and 9 fC is strong, therefore
the significance of the difference to the larger size regime is poor.
However, the difference between the largest (> 9 fC) and the smallest
grains, which show a depletion by a factor of 2.3, is significant: Not

one of the seven grains with QI > 9 fC shows iron abundances as
low as the weak signal. The average of the data with 2–9 fC confirms
this trend and therefore we consider the observed trend noteworthy
here.
3.4 Modelling of grain dynamics
In addition to the compositional analysis of the silicate particles,
we also investigate their origins. Fig. 1 shows the modelled flux
profile and source regions for 20 nm icy grains originating from
the main rings and detected by CDA during the Grand Finale orbits
(Hsu et al. 2018). This model was refined for this work, focusing
on the silicate fraction (Fig. 8), i.e. by assuming a particle density
of 3 g cm–3 . According to the most frequent particle sizes in the
data set (see Fig. 3), we consider spherical particles with three
different radii that should correspond (according to the modelling)
to different dynamical regimes: 15, 30, and 40 nm. The dynamics
of 15 nm particles and smaller are dominated by interaction with

MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

Figure 6. Histograms showing the compositional variation in the main ring silicate data set (‘Rings’) for the (a) Fe/Ca and (b) Mg/Si ratios. For comparison the
variation of ISD particles (‘CDA ISD’) from a previous CDA analysis (Altobelli et al. 2016) is given. The error bars are defined as ± sqrt(N × p×(1–p))/N × 100,
with N being the total number of detections per bin, and p the relative abundance defined as probability between 0 and 1.

1216

S. Linti et al.

Saturn’s magnetic field. This grain size roughly represents CDA’s
lower detection limit. In contrast, the dynamics of particles with
radii of 40 nm and above – the larger population of this study – are
dominated by their ejection velocities and gravitational forces, with
trajectories that become more and more ballistic with increasing size.
A radius of 30 nm represents an intermediate case coinciding with
a size regime where probably most of the silicate particles detected
here lie.
For the simulation, test particles are launched from the main rings,
with a distribution weighted according to their surface areas and local
optical depths (Hsu et al. 2018). From all the trajectory simulations,
the distribution of potential source regions at a given detection
location by CDA along the spacecraft trajectory is calculated. For
that, the rings are divided into 26 segments, each having a radial
extent of 0.05RS . For each particle and ring segment, the model
provides origin probabilities (normalized to values between 0 and
1) that can be summed up accordingly to derive probabilities for
individual particles to originate from a specific ring or, as shown
MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

Table 5. Silicate particle ratios for origins in the inner (C and D rings) versus
outer (B and A rings) main rings. The number of detected dust grains that
fulfil the respective probability thresholds (50, 70, and 90 per cent) are given
in brackets.
Ratio inner/outer main ring origin
Particle radius
Probability > 50 per cent
Probability > 70 per cent
Probability > 90 per cent

15 nm
12
(273)
51
(208)
50.5
(103)

30 nm
8
(233)
8.2
(203)
3.1
(70)

40 nm
11.5
(239)
13.5
(203)
8.6
(125)

in Table 5, from the inner (C and D rings) or outer ring region (B
and A rings). Note, that we restrict the source of the particles to
the main rings only. Thus, a potential exogenous origin cannot be
further constrained. The particle production mechanism is assumed

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

Figure 8. Modelled source regions of silicate particles for three different particle sizes. The x-axes show the vertical distance to the ring plane during detection
by CDA and the y-axes show the radial distance in the equatorial plane of the source region within the main rings. The boundaries of the main ring components
are shown in red and labelled on the right. The origin probabilities, normalized to be between 0 and 1, are shown in the key.

Mineral dust from Saturn’s main rings

4 DISCUSSION
The infall of exogenous material is generally seen as the most
important process driving the compositional evolution of Saturn’s
main rings. Moreover, through so-called ballistic transport, the rings
redistribute their angular momentum via the transport of ejecta produced by micrometeoroid bombardment. For instance, this process
has been shown to explain the optical depth structure across the B and
C ring boundary (Ip 1983; Cuzzi & Estrada 1998; Estrada et al. 2015).
A widely accepted assumption is that Saturn’s rings consisted of pure
water ice when they formed. The non-icy components gradually
‘colour’ the rings, in accordance with the aforementioned dynamical
effects, and are assumed to originate from exogeneous material (IDPs
and ISD), which polluted the rings over time (Cuzzi & Estrada
1998; Cuzzi et al. 2009; Zhang et al. 2017a, b; Estrada & Durisen
2023). A potential exception is the C ring, the composition of which
might have been significantly affected by the more recent break-up
of a large object (Zhang et al. 2017b). The actual colouration of
the rings depends on the ratio between the infalling and outgoing
silicate flux. This is the basis by which the age of Saturn’s rings was
calculated recently, using the amount of polluting material found
by Cassini instruments in the rings, the ring mass determined by
Cassini, and the IDP flux inferred from measurements by CDA’s
Entrance Grid (EG) subsystem (Kempf et al. 2023). Note that the
EG subsystem is only sensitive to large grains (radii larger than
∼1.5 μm; Kempf et al. 2023), which tend to be massive enough
to produce impact charge yields which saturate CDA’s Chemical
Analyzer (CA) subsystem. Thus, they do not produce interpretable
spectra, and direct compositional measurements of the large polluting
IDPs have not been obtained.
No significant organic-rich dust population has currently been
identified in the low-mass end of the exogenous material accessible
for compositional analysis (Fischer et al. 2018), although the larger
IDPs analysed in Kempf et al. (2023) are assumed to have a

significant fraction of organics. We also see no purely organic dust
population leaving the rings into Saturn in the spectra investigated
here. However, the overabundance of ions with mass 27 u in the
silicate spectra (see Section 3) can potentially be explained by small
contributions of organic material (C2 H3 + ) that could be fragments
from larger hydrocarbons, but it is currently unclear if this material
can be attributed to the particles or a contamination of the CDA’s
impact target. However, even if we consider the 27 u excess being
entirely due to organics, CDA still finds clearly less organic material
falling into Saturn than Cassini’s Ion and Neutral Mass Spectrometer
(INMS) in extremely small grains (∼1 nm, e.g. Waite et al. 2018;
Miller et al. 2020) and as Kempf et al. (2023) assume (30 per cent
organics) for more massive IDPs hitting the rings.
We find that the compositions of the material potentially contaminating the mostly icy rings of Saturn and of the non-icy material
emitted by the rings that eventually falls into Saturn are very different.
The factor of 5–6 depletion of Fe (shown by the Fe/Si ratio) compared
to the exogenous IDP particles (Fig. 4a) is striking. The drastic
differences in the average Fe abundance are predominately caused
by a very Fe-rich IDP subpopulation, mostly made of Fe-sulfides
(Fig. 5c), which is entirely missing in the ring debris data set of
this work. Since the measurements of both non-icy populations were
made with the same instrument, they are directly comparable and
an instrument artefact leading to the observed differences can be
ruled out. There is also a noticeable difference in the compositional
diversity: while the minerals measured in the identified main ring
particles only show a moderate scatter in their Mg, Ca, and Fe
abundances, exclusively consisting of Mg-rich/Fe-poor silicates, the
exogenous IDPs observed by CDA in the Saturnian system clearly
possess a variety of different mineral types, such as silicates, sulfides
and oxides (Fischer et al. 2018). However, even the relatively Fe-poor
silicate subset of the exogenous material (Fig. 5d) shows a higher
Fe/Si ratio of 2.8 – comparable to CH chondritic abundances (Fig. 4a)
– than the main ring silicates.
Within the compositionally homogenous silicate component of
main ring debris we find no indication for large compositional
variations reaching Saturn from different regions of the rings. The
only compositional trend that we found is a weakly significant
systematic decrease in Fe in smaller particles (Fig. 7).
Thus, CDA measurements show the composition of dust lost by
the rings into Saturn is distinctly different from that of the IDPs
bombarding the rings, assuming that the smaller IDPs accessible for
compositional analysis are part of the same population as the larger
grains discussed in Kempf et al. (2023). One main result of this
work therefore is that we find no indication of Saturn being a major
sink for pristine contemporary IDPs falling on to Saturn’s rings.
This becomes even more remarkable if we consider that the flux of
silicates falling into Saturn could potentially amount to a significant
fraction of the flux of silicates falling on to the rings (Hsu et al. 2018;
Kempf et al. 2023).
In the following, we will discuss several possible explanations
for these observations, noting that more than one of these scenarios
might be applicable simultaneously.

(1) Observational bias, infalling IDPs: The composition of contemporary IDPs measured by CDA is not representative of the bulk
IDP composition responsible for ring contamination.
(2) Observational bias, outgoing nanodust: The material currently
falling in from the rings towards Saturn is not representative of the
bulk composition of the rings.

MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

to be micrometeoroid impact ejection, hence the production rate is
expected to be proportional to the rings’ local optical depth, the
segment surface areas and the gravitational focusing effect (e.g.
Cuzzi & Estrada 1998). As the C ring is known to be more silicaterich than all other ring segments by about a factor of 5 (Zhang et al.
2017b) we assume a silicate particle production for the C ring five
times higher than for the remaining rings. Note that since the silicates
are (mostly) embedded in the cores of ring particles, this might make
our approach an overestimate, unless much of the material is being
ground down in the innermost C ring and being exposed.
The model results imply, independent from the size, that the
particles preferably originate from the C ring. For 15 nm grains,
the C ring appears to be the clearly dominating source, whereas with
larger radii of 40 nm and even more pronounced at intermediate radii
of 30 nm, the influence of the outer B and A rings becomes more
noticeable (Table 5). Note that even without the applied factor of 5,
the contribution from the C ring would be the largest.
We also note that model uncertainties, based on those in the
input parameters such as the initial speed distribution (Hsu et al.
2018) and the plasma environment, are present, especially when
considering individual grain detections. However, collectively, our
results should represent the overall behaviour of ring silicate grains,
including identifying their source region(s) as shown in Fig. 8. As
stated above, the dynamics of particles with radii of 40 nm and larger
are dominated by their ejection velocities. Thus, the ejection velocity
is a crucial factor for determining the latitudes bigger particles can
reach.

1217

1218

S. Linti et al.

(3) Ring silicates falling into Saturn originate mostly from IDPs
but have been compositionally modified (i.e. depleted in Fe) by
physical and/or chemical processes within the rings.
(4) IDPs are not responsible for the greater part of the silicates
found in the rings and there is a more dominant source for siliceous
material (e.g. from a disrupted large object which formed the rings
in the first place).

(i) 1a: We consider the first reason to be unlikely, since what is
currently known about the evolution of the Solar system regarding
the most relevant IDP source bodies in the Kuiper belt (Kempf et al.
2023), suggests a fairly stable bulk dust composition falling onto the
rings over a time span of 100–200 My [the current estimated age of
the main rings (Estrada & Durisen 2023; Kempf et al. 2023)].
(ii) 1b: An observational bias in the IDP sample accessible for
compositional analysis by CDA is possible. As mentioned above,
the CA subsystem is insensitive to grains that are too large, and
generate an overabundance of ions upon impact. Although this is not
relevant for the Grand Finale ring debris sample of this study (see
Fig. 3), it limits the CDA IDP compositional survey in the Saturnian
system to dust radii of about 0.5 μm or smaller. The mass flux,
however, is generally assumed to be dominated by larger grains with
radii above 50 μm and although these particles have indeed been
measured by CDA’s EG subsystem of CDA (Kempf et al. 2023),
they are inaccessible for compositional analysis. Therefore, if the
composition of the larger IDPs dominating the mass flux is different
to that of the submicron-sized grains as seen by CDA (Fig. 5, Fischer
et al. 2018), this could explain the observations.
Scenario (2) assumes that the ring debris falling into Saturn stems
from an atypical ring region (Scenario 2a), is caused by a transient
event (Scenario 2b), or is prone to a dynamical selection effect
(Scenario 2c) and thus is not representative of the ring bulk silicates:
(i) 2a: Remote sensing by Cassini has shown that the C ring,
although much less massive than the B and A rings, bears the largest
fraction of non-icy material in Saturn’s ring system. This anomaly has
been attributed to disruption of a large body—probably a Centaur—
introducing additional siliceous material into the C ring and roughly
doubling the ring’s mass (Zhang et al. 2017a, b). Although the high
silicate-to-ice particle detection ratio of 33 per cent (Hsu et al. 2018)
measured during the Grand Finale orbits does not agree with the
silicate volume abundances measured in any of the main rings via
remote sensing, namely < 1 per cent for the A and B rings, rising to
4–9 per cent for the C ring (Zhang et al. 2017a, b), it is still in better
agreement with a C ring origin and comes close to the silicate mass
fraction of 14–32 per cent there (using the volume fraction above, a
density of 3 g cm–3 for silicates, and 0.92 g cm–3 for water ice). Hence,
the silicate population measured by CDA should be dominated by
C ring silicates, mostly made of silicates from a hypothetically Fedepleted disrupted body, unlike the presumably exogenous, Fe-rich
grain dominated material in the B ring. As shown in Fig. 8, the
material detected during the Grand Finale orbits – although mainly
originating from the C ring – occasionally also probes the A and
B rings. However, the spectra produced by grains that with high
probability stem from these outer rings do not show any noticeable
compositional difference to those from the C ring (Fig. S2) and thus
MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

Scenario (3): The CDA observation that even the IDP population
with the lowest Fe abundance is not as depleted in iron as the main
ring silicates (Figs 4 and 5) implies that – even if we find a subsequent
selective transport process (Scenario 2) – the infalling IDPs need
to undergo a chemical alteration within the rings first. To explain
the physical (Scenario 3a) or chemical (Scenario 3b) alteration of
initially Fe-rich mineral IDP phases, we consider modification when
IDPs collide with the main rings and during subsequent ballistic
transport by which ring material is repeatedly redistributed within
the ring system by impact ejecta processes (Cuzzi & Durisen 1990;
Durisen et al. 1992; Cuzzi & Estrada 1998).
(i) 3a: A possible physical process that would work at IDPs
impacting on to the main rings with speeds of 10 s of km s–1 is
the impact ionization of Fe by the kinetic energy of the impact
and subsequent removal of these Fe+ ions into the magnetosphere.
Suprathermal Fe+ ions were measured in Saturn’s magnetosphere

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

Scenario (1) is the case in which the exogeneous dust detected
by CDA is compositionally different from the IDPs that have
contaminated the main rings in the past. This could either be due
to a change in IDP composition over time (Scenario 1a), or due to
a selection effect in the IDPs that were sampled by CDA between
2004 and 2016 (Scenario 1b).

we have no indication for a compositionally distinct population of
silicates originating from the C ring. In fact, Fig. 4 shows that there is
not a single measured rocky dust grain falling into Saturn that comes
even close to the average Fe abundance CDA finds in IDPs.
(ii) 2b: A recent violent event has been suggested to explain other
Cassini measurements during the Grand Finale (e.g. Perry et al.
2018; Waite et al. 2018; Serigano et al. 2022; Moses et al. 2023).
Similarly, such an event could potentially serve as a transient source
of the observed Fe-depleted silicates. However, the corresponding
effects of such an event are expected to be limited to the inner D
ring region near the ring plane (e.g. Perry et al. 2018), contrasting
with the fact that ring silicates have been measured up to 0.5RS away
from the ring plane (Fig. 1), which are not reachable for D ring
debris. This suggests a dynamical connection of the ring silicates
to the entire main rings instead of a transient event at the inner D
ring or a localized source in the rings. In addition, there is no clear
compositional connection between Fe-depleted silicates observed by
CDA and the organic-rich compounds seen by Cassini’s INMS that
were reported to originate from such an event (Waite et al. 2018),
but are largely missing in the CDA data set investigated here. In
summary, our results do not support this scenario.
(iii) 2c: A mechanism that preferentially delivers Fe-poor silicates
into Saturn, while Fe-rich phases preferentially remain in the rings,
would explain our observation. The significantly enhanced silicateto-ice ratio of these ring debris (Hsu et al. 2018) compared to the
bulk composition of the rings could already hint at such a selective
process (Zhang et al. 2017a, b; Crida et al. 2019). Such a selective
dynamical process could be due to chemical or physical (mass,
charge, density) parameters. Indeed, from our data set it is striking
that, from over 1000 dust detections (see Section 2.1), none created
an impact charge larger than 230 fC (equivalent to a particle radius
of about 120 nm), despite the CA subsystem of CDA being sensitive
to particles up to about 10 times more massive. If we assume that
electromagnetic interaction is the dominant effect delivering charged
dust particles into Saturn (Hsu et al. 2018), this automatically limits
the mass and size. Larger particles, the dynamics of which are
not dominated by electromagnetic forces, would need very high
ejection velocities after micrometeoroid impact to ballistically fall
into Saturn, which eventually becomes a limiting factor. However,
it is currently unclear how such a mass-selective effect could be
linked to chemical fractionation (i.e. why Fe-rich phases common
in the ring material should be depleted in the dust grains with radii
below ∼100 nm falling into Saturn). Maybe the higher densities of
Fe-rich phases (see Scenario 3) could be a physical discriminator for
chemical fractionation of Saturnian dust infall.

Mineral dust from Saturn’s main rings

by IDP impacts and ballistic transport of ring material we propose
here.
Scenario (4) would question a fundamental assumption in the
generation of Saturn’s rings, i.e. that the rings started their existence
as an almost pure water ice entity and that the current non-icy material
was deposited later via IDPs (e.g. Cuzzi & Estrada 1998). The most
credible scenario for the generation of the rings – the disruption of
a moon or another large body by tidal forces or collision (Roche
1849; Charnoz et al. 2018; Wisdom et al. 2022; Teodoro et al. 2023)
– indeed easily allows the ab initio availability of non-icy material
as ring constituents.
(i) 4a: In a scenario like the disruption of a large, differentiated
moon, it would be more likely to create a ring with substantial
amounts of mantle silicate (e.g. Harris 1984; Dones 1991) than one
of almost pure water ice (Charnoz et al. 2018; Wisdom et al. 2022).
The Fe-rich IDPs that have impacted the ring since its creation would
then only be a minor constituent of a ring silicate composition which
is otherwise dominated by mantle material from an early moon. The
Fe deficiency (when compared to chondritic or solar abundances)
of the ring particles measured by CDA would require the precursor
body to be differentiated, with Fe-poor mantle material preferentially
surviving in the rings, while the denser, Fe-rich core material fell into
Saturn after disruption of the former moon.
(ii) 4b: Another possibility is that the bulk of a smaller – not necessarily differentiated – precursor body was Fe-poor. For example,
there are chondritic parent bodies with primordial low abundances of
Fe, e.g. the parent bodies of LL chondrites (see Fig. 4 and Abe et al.
2006; Okada et al. 2006). However, such a scenario would imply an
old ring age, which would be in disagreement with the age estimates
from Kempf et al. (2023), and the body needed to be sufficiently
large to create the entire ring. Thus, we consider the differentiated
large body from Scenario 4a as more plausible.
Scenario 4 is hard to reconcile with Cassini remote sensing
data of the main rings that support a maximum average silicate
abundance of less than 1 per cent by volume averaged over the
entire ring (Zhang et al. 2017a, b), although improved constraints
resolving the ongoing debate about the composition of the non-icy
material by a future mission could well change the picture. Using
the Cassini upper limit on silicate material, an origin of this silicate
fraction in mantle material of a disrupted moon instead of IDPs
would imply a substantially lower ring age than the 100–200 My
inferred by Kempf et al. (2023) from IDP contamination. Since
the overwhelming amount of silicates needs to stem from the Fedepleted mantle material of the moon, the age of the ring would be
less than a few million years, which is younger than any currently
discussed scenario (Crida et al. 2019; Wisdom et al. 2022; Estrada &
Durisen 2023; Kempf et al. 2023). Additionally, the break-up of such
a disrupted large object entraining significant amounts of material
into the C ring would not explain the observed anticorrelation of
a high non-icy fraction in the C ring and its low optical depth (e.g.
Zhang et al. 2017a, b), an effect also observed in the Cassini division.
5 CONCLUSIONS
The composition of Saturn’s main rings is of high scientific interest,
providing constraints on their vividly debated origin and age (Crida
et al. 2019; Ida 2019). One scenario suggests that the mid-sized
Saturnian satellites and the ring moons have accreted (Charnoz et
al. 2011; Crida & Charnoz 2012; Salmon & Canup 2017) from a
formerly more massive and expanding ring (Salmon et al. 2010).
MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

and their radial distribution indicates a source located inwards of
Enceladus’ orbit (Christon et al. 2015). Christon et al. (2015) indeed
suggest IDPs partially ionizing when impacting Saturn and the main
rings at hypervelocities, as a likely source for the suprathermal Fe+
population. If Fe escapes more efficiently than other constituents,
the remaining recondensed material would be Fe-depleted and could
account for the homogeneous Fe-depleted silicates observed in this
work. However, since the Fe concentration in infalling IDPs differs
by more than a factor of 5 from dust falling into Saturn, it seems
questionable whether more than 80 per cent of the infalling Fe (more
than 50 kg s–1 , using the total flux numbers by Kempf et al. 2023)
can be removed in the form of Fe+ without removing the other
IDP constituents by a similar process. The low ionization yield
(RSF) for Fe compared to other rock forming elements like Mg
or Ca (Fiege et al. 2014) argues against that. Indeed, observations
by Christon et al. (2014) report the presence of a large number of
ions potentially stemming from other rock forming elements. Ions
with masses of ∼28 u – that could at least partially be attributed to
Si+ – exhibit similarly increased abundances in the inner Saturnian
system as Fe+ . The data also show a small peak in agreement
with Ca+ (40 u) observed in Saturn’s equatorial magnetosphere
and a high noise floor at Mg+ (24 u) in principle allowing the
presence of magnesium ions (Christon et al. 2014). Therefore, the
data show no hint for a specifically efficient removal of Fe+ from
the main ring or infalling IDP material compared to other rockforming ions, although we note that Mg+ is not quantifiable with
the same level of significance as the other rock-forming ion species
due to signal interference with water-related ions (Christon et al.
2014).
(ii) 3b: We consider that chemical alteration of the original IDP
minerals by evaporation and recondensation processes during the
initial collisions of IDPs with the rings, as well as during subsequent
ballistic transport, is highly likely (e.g. Chernonozhkin et al. 2021;
Kempf et al. 2023). Upon impact on to larger, mostly icy, ring
material, infalling IDPs will inevitably evaporate at impact speeds of
15 km s–1 and above (e.g. Postberg et al. 2014) thereby mixing with
water vapor released from the struck icy ring material it has hit. Most
of the infalling Fe in such IDPs (that are small enough for CDA to
measure the composition of) comes in the form of sulfides (Fig. 5c;
Fischer et al. 2018). Due to the oxidizing conditions in a water
vapor environment, recondensation as metal or sulfide is effectively
prevented in favour of Fe-oxides and SO2 (e.g. Wozniakiewicz et
al. 2011). Similarly, though much less efficiently, IDPs composed of
Fe-bearing silicates, that evaporate upon impact and mix with water
vapor, could become depleted in Fe in favour of FeO formation as it
has been observed by aqueous alteration of GEMS (glass with embedded metal and sulfide) grains (Keller & Snead 2022). Such a process
could over time – maybe supported by repeated heating, melting
and/or evaporation and condensation during the ballistic transport
(Durisen & Estrada 2023) – effectively lead to a conversion of the
IDP minerals into two main phases: Fe-rich oxides and Fe-depleted
silicates. SO2 would volatilize over geological time-scales and only
traces of sulphur can still be found in a few silicate particles leaving
the rings into Saturn (see Fig. 2b). There is a recent finding by JWST
observations that supports the idea of processing of ring material
at elevated temperatures: Hedman et al. (2024) report that ices in
Saturn’s main rings are strongly dominated by crystalline water ice.
At temperatures that – from solar illumination – always stay below
120 K (e.g. Altobelli et al. 2008), substantial amounts of amorphous
ice are expected to form from radiation damage over geological timescales. The entirely crystalline ring ice could therefore be an indicator
of the same efficient heating and recondensation processes triggered

1219

1220

S. Linti et al.

MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

preceding the Grand Finale is reported by Linti et al. (2024b).
Spectral analysis of the Fe-rich grains identifies them as oxides,
consistent with hematite. Although these grains could stem from the
A or B rings, we note this interpretation is not unique because several
other dust sources mix in the region just outside the main rings (Linti
et al. 2024b). However, no Fe-oxides (nor Fe-sulfides) are detected
in the data set discussed in this work, sampled radially inwards of the
main rings. Together with the Fe depletion in the observed silicate
dust, this finding implies an accumulation of Fe-rich minerals –
mostly Fe-oxides – in the main rings over time. Indeed, the presence
of nanophase hematite or metallic iron in the Saturnian system, and
particularly in the main rings, is suggested by earlier studies (Clark et
al. 2008; Stillman & Olhoeft 2008; Cuzzi et al. 2009) and discussed
as an important UV-absorber. Other space weathering mechanisms
that produce nanophase iron are also known and could be relevant
in further modifying the composition of Saturn’s rings (Pieters &
Noble 2016). The dynamical reason and the preferred removal of
Fe-poor silicates leaving Fe-rich phases behind, currently remains
elusive and we are left with mere speculations (see Scenario 2c).
AC K N OW L E D G E M E N T S
The research in context of this work was supported by the European Space Agency under the contract 4000118000/16/ES/JD, and
the European Research Council Consolidator grant 724908-Habitat
OASIS. Jon K. Hillier thanks the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) for funding under grant HI-2157/1–1. The authors thank Larry
Esposito, Kelly Miller, and the International Space Science Institute
(ISSI) for the opportunity of valuable discussions.
DATA AVA I L A B I L I T Y
All data needed for the analysis are available in the main text or the
supplementary materials. The CDA data underlying this article are
available on the Small Bodies Node of the Planetary Data System
(PDS-SBN), at https://sbn.psi.edu/pds/resource/cocda.html.
REFERENCES
Abe M. et al., 2006, Science, 312, 1334
Altobelli N. et al., 2016, Science, 352, 312
Altobelli N., Spilker L. J., Leyrat C., Pilorz S., 2008, Planet. Space Sci., 56,
134
Bradley E. T., Colwell J. E., Esposito L. W., in review
Charnoz S. et al., 2011, Icarus, 216, 535
Charnoz S., Canup R. M., Crida A., Dones L., 2018, Planetary Ring Systems:
Properties, Structure, and Evolution. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,
p. 517
Chernonozhkin S. M. et al., 2021, Nat. Commun., 12, 5646
Christon S. P., Hamilton D. C., Mitchell D. G., DiFabio R. D., Krimigis S.
M., 2014, J. Geophys. Res., 119, 5662
Christon S. P., Hamilton D. C., Plane J. M. C., Mitchell D. G., DiFabio R. D.,
Krimigis S. M., 2015, J. Geophys. Res., 120, 2720
Clark R. N. et al., 2008, Icarus, 193, 372
Clark R. N. et al., 2012, Icarus, 218, 831
Connerney J. E. P., 1986, Geophys. Res. Lett., 13, 773
Crida A., Charnoz S., 2012, Science, 338, 1196
Crida A., Charnoz S., Hsu H.-W., Dones L., 2019, Nat. Astron., 3, 967
Cruikshank D. P., Imanaka H., Dalle Ore C. M., 2005, Adv. Space Res, 36,
178
Cuzzi J. N., Clark R. N., Filacchione G., French R. G., Johnson R., Marouf
E., Spilker L., 2009, Saturn from Cassini-Huygens, Springer, Dordrecht,
p. 459
Cuzzi J. N., Durisen R. H., 1990, Icarus, 84, 467

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

We have analysed the non-icy fraction of dust particles falling
into Saturn that have been mobilized by impacts on to Saturn’s
main rings. This dust population was sampled by Cassini’s CDA
during the Grand Finale orbits, between the planet and the inner
edge of the rings. The high impact speeds (∼30 km s–1 ) of the dust
particles on to the instrument allowed the elemental compositions of
particles only 10 s of nm in size to be measured. The compositions
were determined from CDA’s TOF relatively low-resolution mass
spectra by applying a deconvolution technique, revealing a relatively
homogenous composition of Mg-rich silicates with Mg, Si, and
Ca similar to CI chondritic values; Fe, however, was found to
be significantly depleted. The Al abundance could not be reliably
quantified because of a potential interference with small amounts
of hydrocarbons that are either a minor particle constituent or stem
from contamination of CDA’s impact target.
We observe no compositional variation between particles depending on their origin from the A, B, or C rings. In comparison with
exogenous IDPs encountered by CDA in the Saturnian system, the
ring material shows an even starker contrast in Fe abundances. The
observed IDPs exhibit a more than 5 times higher Fe abundance,
mostly due to an iron-sulfide IDP sub-population, which is entirely
missing in the homogenous main ring dust. Even though an overestimation of the IDP Fe abundance by CDA is possible (see below
and Scenario 1b), such a stark discrepancy is unexpected since IDPs
are thought to be the main supplier of non-icy material on to the
otherwise icy rings (e.g. Kempf et al. 2023). Thus, we conclude
that Saturn cannot be a major sink for unaltered contemporary IDPs
falling onto Saturn’s rings.
In Section 4, we have discussed several scenarios for the observed
compositional discrepancies between the mineral compositions of
IDPs falling on to the rings and those of dust leaving the rings
towards Saturn. In the following, we discuss the most likely of the
above scenarios and their implications. We conclude that, although
there are alternative possibilities, all currently available observations
are in agreement with a combination of Scenarios (3b) and (1b) to
explain the drastic depletion in Fe that we have found in the nanosized silicate particles from the rings: chemical alteration of IDPs in
the rings (3b) possibly combined with an observational bias in the
IDP data set accessible for CDA’s compositional analysis (1b). The
greater part of the IDP flux entering the Saturnian system originates
from the Kuiper belt (Kempf et al. 2023). An observational bias,
introduced by CDA’s ability to assess only the composition of small,
submicron-sized IDPs entering the Saturnian system and falling on
to the rings (1b) would become relevant if Fe-rich phases would be
preferentially concentrated in submicron-sized grains of the IDP flux,
while Fe-poor minerals are systematically ‘hidden’ from CDA in
larger grains (that CDA’s Chemical Analyzer cannot observe). Such
a scenario is indeed supported by recent findings that the infalling
Kuiper belt dust might contain an unusually high fraction of Fe-rich
phases concentrated in the small sub-μm aggregates (Keller & Snead
2021; Keller & Flynn 2022). However, it is highly uncertain if these
findings, from investigations of a small number of potential Kuiper
belt dust grains found on Earth (Keller & Snead 2021; Keller & Flynn
2022) are representative of the bulk composition of IDPs from the
Kuiper belt entering the Saturnian system. The composition – and
even more the compositional fractionation – of such dust is currently
poorly constrained.
We think that chemical high temperature alteration of impacting
IDPs from Fe-sulfides (and potentially silicates) leading to the
formation of Fe-oxides is inevitable (3b). Interestingly, the detection
of three Fe-rich grains – in addition to nine Fe-poor silicates – just
outside the F ring by CDA during Cassini’s Ring-Grazing orbits

Mineral dust from Saturn’s main rings

Okada T., Shirai K., Yamamoto Y., Arai T., Ogawa K., Hosono K., Kato M.,
2006, Science, 312, 1338
Perry M. E. et al., 2018, Geophys. Res. Lett., 45, 10,093
Pieters C. M., Noble S. K., 2016, J. Geophys. Res., 121, 1865
Pollack J. B., 1975, Space Sci. Rev., 18, 3
Postberg F. et al., 2014, Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 49, 1666
Postberg F., Kempf S., Rost D., Stephan T., Srama R., Trieloff M., Mocker
A., Goerlich M., 2009a, Planet. Space Sci., 57, 1359
Postberg F., Kempf S., Schmidt J., Brilliantov N., Beinsen A., Abel B., Buck
U., Srama R., 2009b, Nature, 459, 1098
Postberg F., Schmidt J., Hillier J., Kempf S., Srama R., 2011, Nature, 474,
620
Roche E., 1849, Académie des Sciences et des Lettres de Montpellier, 1, 243
Salmon J., Canup R. M., 2017, ApJ, 836, 109
Salmon J., Charnoz S., Crida A., Brahic A., 2010, Icarus, 209, 771
Sephton M. A., Waite J. H., Jr., Brockwell T. G., 2018, Astrobiology, 18, 843
Serigano J., Hörst S. M., He C., Gautier T., Yelle R. V., Koskinen T. T., Trainer
M. G., Radke M. J., 2022, J. Geophys. Res., 127, e2022JE007238
Spilker L., Ferrari C., Cuzzi J. N., Showalter M. R., Pearl J. C., Wallis B.,
2003, Planet. Space Sci., 51, 929
Srama R. et al., 2004, Space Sci. Rev., 114, 465
Srama R., 2009, Habilitation thesis, Univ. Stuttgart
Stillman D., Olhoeft G., 2008, J. Geophys. Res., 113, E09005
Teodoro L. F. A., Kegerreis J. A., Estrada P. R., Ćuk M., Eke V. R., Cuzzi J.
N., Massey R. J., Sandnes T. D., 2023, ApJ, 955, 137
Trieloff M., Fischer C., Postberg F., Schmidt J., 2023, EGU General
Assembly, EGU23-16469, Vienna, Austria
Waite J. H., Jr. et al., 2018, Science, 362, aat2382
Wisdom J., Dbouk R., Militzer B., Hubbard W. B., Nimmo F., Downey B.
G., French R. G., 2022, Science, 377, 1285
Wozniakiewicz P. J. et al., 2011, Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 46, 1007
Zhang Z. et al., 2017b, Icarus, 281, 297
Zhang Z., Hayes A. G., Janssen M. A., Nicholson P. D., Cuzzi J. N., de Pater
I., Dunn D. E., 2017a, Icarus, 294, 14

S U P P O RT I N G I N F O R M AT I O N
Supplementary data are available at MNRAS online.
Please note: Oxford University Press is not responsible for the content
or functionality of any supporting materials supplied by the authors.
Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the
corresponding author for the article.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.

© 2024 The Author(s).
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Royal Astronomical Society. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

MNRAS 529, 1207–1221 (2024)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/529/2/1207/7615453 by Universität Stuttgart user on 29 June 2026

Cuzzi J. N., Estrada P. R., 1998, Icarus, 132, 1
Cuzzi J. N., French R. G., Hendrix A. R., Olson D. M., Roush T., Vahidinia
S., 2018, Icarus, 309, 363
de Pater I., Dickel J. R., 1991, Icarus, 94, 474
Dones L., 1991, Icarus, 92, 194
Dougherty M. K., Esposito L. W., Krimigis S. M., 2009, Saturn from CassiniHuygens. Springer, Dordrecht
Durisen R. H., Bode P. W., Cuzzi J. N., Cederbloom S. E., Murphy B. W.,
1992, Icarus, 100, 364
Durisen R. H., Estrada P. R., 2023, Icarus, 400, 115221
Estrada P. R., Durisen R. H., 2023, Icarus, 400, 115296
Estrada P. R., Durisen R. H., Cuzzi J. N., Morgan D. A., 2015, Icarus, 252,
415
Fiege K., Trieloff M., Hillier J. K., Guglielmino M., Postberg F., Srama R.,
Kempf S., Blum J., 2014, Icarus, 241, 336
Fischer C., Postberg F., Altobelli N., Nölle L., Albin T., 2018, EPSC, 12,
1279
Harris A. W., 1984, in Greenberg R., Brahic A., eds., IAU Coll. 75, Planetary
Rings. Univ. Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ
Hedman M. M. et al., 2024, JGR Planets, in press
Hillier J. K. et al., 2014, Planet. Space Sci., 97, 9
Hillier J. K., McBride N., Green S. F., Kempf S., Srama R., 2006, Planet.
Space Sci., 54, 1007
Hillier J. K., Postberg F., Sestak S., Srama R., Kempf S., Trieloff M.,
Sternovsky Z., Green S. F., 2012, J. Geophys. Res., 117, E09002
Hillier J. K., Sternovsky Z., Kempf S., Trieloff M., Guglielmino M., Postberg
F., Price M. C., 2018, Planet. Space Sci., 156, 96
Hsu H.-W. et al., 2018, Science, 362, eaat3185
Ida S., 2019, Science, 364, 1028
Ip W.-H., 1983, Nature, 302, 599
Keller L. P., Flynn G. J., 2022, Nat. Astron., 6, 731
Keller L. P., Snead C. J., 2021, Goldschmidt 2021.
Keller L. P., Snead C. J., 2022, 85th Annual Meeting of the Meteoritical
Society, LPI Contributions, 2695, 6506, Glasgow, Scotland
Kempf S., Altobelli N., Schmidt J., Cuzzi J. N., Estrada P. R., Srama R., 2023,
Sci. Adv., 9, eadf8537
Linti S., Khawaja N., Hillier J. K., Nölle L., Fischer C., Hsu H.-W., Srama
R., Postberg F., 2024b, MNRAS, stae238
Lodders K., Fegley B., 1998, The planetary scientist’s companion, Oxford
Univ. Press, New York
Miller K. E. et al., 2020, Icarus, 339, 113595
Mocker A. et al., 2011, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 82, 095111
Morris R. V., Lauer H. V., Jr., Lawson C. A., Gibson E. K., Jr, Nace G. A.,
Stewart C., 1985, J. Geophys. Res., 90, 3126
Moses J. I. et al., 2023, Icarus, 391, 115328
Nicholson P. D. et al., 2008, Icarus, 193, 182
Northrop T. G., Hill J. R., 1982, J. Geophys. Res., 87, 6045

1221

